?<text_id="A13N004">
Fred's vision still pushing indigenous healthcare
INDIGENOUS people who are at risk of becoming blind because of diabetes are receiving world-class healthcare for the first time.
An initiative funded by the Fred Hollows Foundation and rolled out this week now means that when indigenous patients - often from remote communities - come in to a health clinic, a retinal camera will send images for examination to a centre in Melbourne.
Rather than wait weeks or months, the results are sent back to doctors within two days.
Tele-retinal imaging, which aims to prevent disease through early detection, has been set up in health clinics in remote parts of Australia such as Miwatj, in East Arnhem Land, about 1000km east of Darwin. Routine screening has also started in Alice Springs and Katherine.
Fred Hollows Foundation chief executive Brian Doolan said the technology was the next big jump in the delivery of health services to indigenous Australians since Hollows's time. "It puts the best of technology right into the hands of Aboriginal healthcare workers, the people right on the frontline," he said.
Alicia Jenkins, professor of diabetes and vascular medicine at the University of Sydney and one of the experts who has developed the technology, said: "This dramatically improves the turnaround time of the results... this is a wonderful use of technology to overcome the remote location and shortage of doctors in the region.
"There has been a huge need for this for some time."
The imaging process is just one aspect of the $3 million TEAMSnet program being rolled out by the Hollows foundation in partnership with the universities of Sydney and Melbourne, and other Australian institutions.
The project also features a hi-tech electronic medical record system aimed at preventing chronic disease. When the doctor or health worker enters a patient's name, every test the patient has undergone is displayed.
This includes cholesterol levels, blood pressure, X-rays and any recommendations made by dieticians or health workers about their health and weight.
James Bray, 72, is a retired technology consultant who loves to paint in the style of Albert Namatjira. Mr Bray was born and bred in Alice Springs and was diagnosed with diabetes when he was 49.
"I love painting so much," he said yesterday. "Now that I'm retired, I have much more time for it, so if I have poor sight, my life would be so much harder. In my life, it is eyes first, heart second."
When Mr Bray came in to the health clinic at Alice Springs yesterday, the retinal photographs identified significant damage to the macula, the most important part of the retina.
His case was escalated to "urgent" and was referred to Alice Springs Hospital for treatment. If the damage had gone unmanaged, Mr Bray's vision loss could have been rapid and harder to salvage.
Laima Brazionis, the TEAMSnet program director, said: "We encourage people who have diabetes to have these check-ups - which are far less time-consuming and stressful than the average eye examination - because they prevent blindness in so many."
The new program is also being run in partnership with the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory.
