?<text_id="A13N002">
Strands of NBN improving indigenous lives
ASK Debbie Mundy what the National Broadband Network means to her and she'll tell you how the strands of fibre are life-changing.
A diabetic, Ms Mundy was one of 50 people to take part in an NBN telehealth trial for chronic diseases in Armidale, northern NSW.
With her blood sugar level in the high 20s, she didn't hesitate in participating after rave reviews from a friend.
Ms Mundy says the trial shows that blood sugar monitoring can be done successfully from the comfort of one's home - a boost for indigenous Australians like her.
It only takes a few minutes to get the readings, instead of having to travel far and wide to see a GP. And even then those appointments are hard to come by - a contrast for urban folk.
"Aboriginal people don't want to see a GP unless they really have to. You (city people) do take it for granted that you can get to see a doctor," Ms Mundy says.
"A lot of them don't bulk bill as well so it's hard for us as Aboriginal people and other people with not a lot of money (to see them).
"Out here, if you want to see a GP and if you don't have a family GP it could take a couple of weeks."
According to an ABC Radio report, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are three times more likely as non-indigenous people to have diabetes. The death rate from diabetes among indigenous people is almost 12 times that of non-indigenous people.
As part of the trial, Ms Mundy's home was set up with an NBN connection from retail service provider SkyMesh.
Nurses with the telehealth trial, funded by the state and federal governments, set up the equipment at Ms Mundy's home.
She received a tablet computer, glucometer, a pulse oximeter (to monitor oxygen levels and heart rate) and blood pressure monitor.
"They (nurses) talk you through it... they tell you what to do and what equipment to use and set it up as a one-off," she says.
The readings are transmitted back to the telehealth hub, where nurses study Ms Mundy's readings. "It's good because with my sugars I could see that it was sitting around the 27s and 23s and I knew that it was terribly high," says Ms Mundy, an Aboriginal liaison officer at a hospital in Armidale.
"That had been happening to me for a long time but because I wasn't monitoring it daily I couldn't see it there."
Ms Mundy says the advice she has received on how to decrease her blood sugar levels has worked wonders. "My sugar's down to 9 and I'm trying to get them under 7... I'll get there and I'm feeling heaps better and I've increased my exercises as well," she says.
"It's all due to support from the telehealth nurses."
She says the NBN has "really changed my life", adding: "Before, I'd get to lunchtime and want to get home, have a sleep. I'm now on insulin and that (advice) came out through the telehealth monitoring of my sugars."
Ms Mundy has already spread the word to her community and wants everyone to know how beneficial the NBN is.
Armidale Community Health's Coralie Wales, who is the project leader, is pleased with the results of the trial, which she said had a large number of participants from the indigenous community.
Dr Wales said one in five people in Armidale was Aboriginal, and she wanted to engage the Aboriginal community to take part in more trials, such as a new cancer-related telehealth pilot.
"We're really trying to work with our Aboriginal community now for the best way to help feel comfortable about it because our project team needs to understand the experience of cancer for Aboriginal people," Dr Wales said.
"We already know that most families are really heavily impacted by cancer and it's really quite shocking.
"The problem is that by the time people are prepared to put their hand up they're often just so ill that they go into hospital and don't come out." She said early intervention was key.
"We want people to stay healthy and if they do have symptoms to get really early help," Dr Wales said.
"That's what we're working with the Aboriginal community to achieve."
A report on the chronic diseases trial is due in the next few months. Dr Wales hopes the processes can be implemented elsewhere so other patients can benefit from the NBN.
