?<text_id="A13N003">
Fruit stops diabetes, but junk the juices
An apple a day keeps the doctor away - if you eat it whole
EATING fruit lowers the risk of developing diabetes but drinking fruit juice seems to raise it, a large study suggests.
Blueberries, grapes and apples appear to be best at warding off diabetes, according to research suggesting that swapping juice for whole fruits will lower the risk of the disease.
Scientists suggest this may be because healthy nutrients are lost in the juicing process while sugar is absorbed more rapidly into the blood from liquids.
A team led by researchers at Harvard University looked at three studies that gathered data on 187,000 US nurses. They were asked about their eating habits every four years, and 6.5 per cent of them developed diabetes. People who ate three servings a week of blueberries had a 26 per cent lower chance of developing the disease, they found. Those regularly eating grapes and raisins had a 12 per cent reduced risk, and apples and pears cut the chances by 7 per cent.
People who ate prunes also had an 11 per cent reduced risk of type 2 diabetes after adjusting for other factors.
However, the study found that drinking fruit juice increased by 8 per cent the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
The authors say that swapping three weekly servings of fruit juice for whole fruit reduced the diabetes risk by 7 per cent and more for many fruits. Replacing three servings a week of fruit juice with blueberries cut the risk by 33 per cent, while replacing juice with grapes and raisins cut the risk by 19 per cent.
The risk was also 14 per cent lower if juice was replaced with apples and pears, 13 per cent lower if replaced with bananas and 12 per cent lower if replaced with grapefruit, according to calculations adjusted for people's age and lifestyle.
"Greater consumption of specific whole fruits, particularly blueberries, grapes and apples, is significantly associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes, whereas greater consumption of fruit juice is associated with a higher risk," they write in the British Medical Journal. "These results support recommendations on increasing consumption of a variety of whole fruits, especially blueberries, grapes and apples, as a measure for diabetes prevention."
The researchers say these fruits contain a high level of compounds known as anthocyanins, which some research has suggested could protect against diabetes.
