?<text_id="A14N005">
Daily berry fix helps to ward off diabetes
Delicious fruits are the new weapon in the fight against obesity diseases
A HANDFUL of raspberries or a cup of blueberry juice daily is the latest weapon in the worldwide fight to address the rising tide of obesity-linked diabetes and metabolic syndrome.
The groundbreaking research announced this week at the World Horticultural Congress in Brisbane by Yves Desjardins, of Canada's Laval University, concludes that it is possible to lose 10 per cent of body weight and stop further weight gain overall by eating a handful of berries a day.
But the latest health boost offered by berries is not directly linked to their trendy "antioxidant" properties.
Instead, it is the ability of special polyphenol compounds found in high concentration in raspberries, strawberries, blackberries, blueberries and cranberries to enhance the dominance of "good" stomach and gut bacteria that helps reduce obesity.
Professor Desjardins yesterday described the research as a "paradigm shift" in approaching diet-related diseases, showing that restoring bacterial balance in the gut through food choices was central to maintaining and restoring good health.
The research also showed that the good microflora in the gut encouraged by berries altered insulin sensitivity, staving off the onset of obesity-linked type 2 diabetes and similar diseases.
"When you are obese or have a bad 'McDonald's' diet, the dominant type of bacteria in your gut becomes quite nasty and releases fatty acids, which make you put on more weight, have a fatty, unhealthy liver and become more likely to develop diabetes and metabolic syndrome," Professor Desjardins said.
"If you want to become lean or healthy again, you need to restore the gut balance by encouraging another group of "good" microbacteria. What we have shown is that if you consume a small amount of berries constantly for a period of time you will find significant health benefits." The research also showed that even people who persisted in eating a bad diet of a hamburger and cola a day - but who consumed a handful of berries or berry juice too - were unlikely to gain weight or develop diabetes as fast as people who ate the same bad diet but without the berries.
At Red Hill Berries farm near Caboolture, north of Brisbane, the picking of 10ha of plump pink raspberries grown for the Driscoll group is in full swing, under the watchful eye of farm manager Shane Hodgkiss. Owner Richard McGruddy said he was not surprised to hear of the latest health benefits linked to berries. "The flavour and the taste that is coming through in these new varieties that we now grow is really being picked up by consumers, who know they are really healthy to eat," he said.
