?<text_id="A14N006">
Wake-up call for the high-protein brigade
AN Australian study concluding that a high protein, low-carbohydrate diet reduces lifespan and increases the risk of diabetes and heart disease should be of great concern to the fitness industry, where a large proportion of people believe a diet dominated by protein shakes or bars leads to lean muscle mass and rapid weight loss.
Timmy Naidoo, director of Sydney supplement store Body Dynamix, has seen how the myth that carbohydrates are evil has infiltrated the health and fitness community.
"About 60 to 70 per cent of first-time bodybuilders and fitness models come to me and confess they consume about three protein shakes a day and neglect a well-balanced meal," says Naidoo, who has a diploma in personal training and nutrition.
"Young people think the more protein shakes the better, however too many shakes slows down the metabolism. A well-balanced diet of carbs, protein and fats provides adequate nutrients; a carefully monitored supplements program, adequate rest and a structured fitness regime will achieve results." As a personal trainer and two-time International Natural Bodybuilding Association finalist for NSW, I've advised my predominantly corporate female clients against relying on meal replacement shakes, which are unsustainable in the long term and should only be used as a last resort.
This appears to be supported by the study at the University of Sydney's Charles Perkins Centre in which mice were fed a variety of 25 diets. Researchers examined the effects of protein, fat and carbohydrate on energy intake, metabolic health, ageing and longevity.
The research, published in the journal Cell Metabolism in March, found that a high protein, low-carbohydrate diet resulted in less body fat and food intake but also reduced lifespan and raised the risk of diabetes and heart disease. Researchers believe these results will apply to humans.
The study also found that, in contrast, a high carbohydrate, low-protein diet resulted in more body fat but a longer lifespan and less risk of diabetes and heart disease.
A low protein, high-fat diet provided the worst health outcomes. The short-term side effects of a high protein, low-carbohydrate diet include constipation, vitamin deficiency, a poor immune system, gastrointestinal upsets and high intake of saturated fats.
This can lead to serious long-term problems such as diabetes and heart disease. Ketosis (the state in which the body uses fat for energy) can occur when the body is extremely low in carbs, eventually resulting in starvation and muscle wastage.
Ameer Ibrahim, FIFA sports medicine instructor for the Asian Football Confederation, says it's difficult for the body to ingest large volumes of protein year after year.
"Asian countries like Korea and Japan have a high incidence of cancer of the gut due to their high-protein diet of fish and cured meat," Ibrahim says.
"I'm also concerned that gym-goers here consume too much protein. "Protein is important to repair muscles after lifting weights and putting on size, but the dosage of is paramount: the body requires 2.5g of protein daily per kilogram of body weight." Ibrahim, who is also chief medical officer for the Sydney Roosters and Sydney FC, agrees with researchers who say a diet that has moderate amounts of high-quality protein (about 15 to 20 per cent of total calorie intake) and is relatively low in fat and high in good-quality complex carbohydrates will yield the best metabolic health and prospects for longevity.
"This is a good all-year round strategy for optimum health," he says. If you want to build lean muscle, South Sydney Rabbitohs team dietitian Caitlin Reid says you need a good weights program and a nutrition plan that meets your training goals.
"Having a positive energy balance creates the right environment to gain muscle and you need to time your nutrient intake around your training - focusing on protein and carbohydrates immediately after exercise," she says. "Consume small hits of protein throughout the day: 25g of protein six times per day. You can get this through good-quality protein sources like lean red meat, skinless chicken, fish and dairy products."
