?<text_id="A15N002">
Apple's watch to monitor diabetes
Medical device maker DexCom is designing an app that will display readings from its diabetes glucose monitor on Apple's upcoming smartwatch, giving the watch an early foothold in the healthcare market.
DexCom's glucose monitor tracks a person's blood-sugar levels continuously. The company has shown a picture of the app, which converts that data into a simple graph that is just a glance at the wrist away. It says the app is expected to be ready when the Apple Watch is launched in April.
Apple declined to comment. The company hasn't accepted any apps for the coming watch yet but has provided guidelines and code to developers for creating apps for it. The latest iPhone operating system increased its health and fitness offerings.
The US Food and Drug Administration had been closely scrutinising such applications. But the agency loosened its oversight in late January, months after a group of software engineers, many of whose children have Type 1 diabetes, developed a system for monitoring diabetes patients' blood sugar over the internet. The system was distributed without first getting regulatory approval.
The group's effort challenged the slow pace of innovation and regulatory approval in the field. It also highlighted the growing role that Silicon Valley companies and software developers hope to have in monitoring and maintaining people's health.
The DexCom monitor uses a hair's-width sensor under the skin to measure blood glucose levels every five minutes.
Previously, the FDA considered glucose monitors to be Class III medical devices, meaning they received the highest level of regulatory scrutiny. But the spread of NightScout, the system developed by the group of software engineers, and DexCom's submission of a separate iPhone app for review prompted the FDA to change course.
DexCom's monitors will remain Class III devices, but software that helps display the data they produce on mobile devices or smartwatches now only needs to be registered with the FDA and doesn't require prior marketing approval.
The FDA has been reassessing its health-apps policies. "We felt that the risks that the app imposed weren't as high," said Alberto Gutierrez, director of the FDA's Office of In Vitro Diagnostics and Radiological Health. NightScout software takes data from the glucose monitor, mainly for Type 1 diabetes patients, and uploads it to the internet. That allows parents - and caregivers - to keep track of their children's blood sugar from afar via their cellphones, tablets and Pebble watches.
