?<text_id="A15N003">
New saliva test could have diabetes licked
Medicine: The development of a low-cost, saliva-based glucose test using a 2D printer could make blood tests a thing of the past for diabetics.
The Australian-developed needle-free test detects concentrations of glucose and is up to 100 times more sensitive than current blood sensors.
The easy-to-use test integrates biosensors or chemical signatures into printed transistors.
The usual way of testing for glucose relies on a finger prick to draw blood for testing.
"It could work in a number of possible ways but the most futuristic way, which would be kind of cool, is you might just print your own sensor on your inkjet printer at home," the University of Newcastle's Paul Dastoor said.
"You would get a cartridge potentially that you could print on a little piece of plastic, cut it out and lick it. I expect it will plug into a low-cost reader." The patented innovation was created by Professor Dastoor and his team at the University's Centre of Organic Electronics.
"I think the cost of each device would be less than a cent," he said. The team has been focused on the development of new electronic devices at the intersection between semiconductors and plastics.
The development of a paint with semiconducting particles means electronic designs can now be downloaded and printed relatively cheaply from an inkjet printer. The saliva-based test of glucose levels for diabetic patients was developed using a reel to reel printer.
Electrical components can be printed using an ink that is a semiconductor. After mixing in an enzyme, it will assess glucose levels when a diabetic places a sample of their saliva on the test.
Sensors that can identify different chemical signatures also have potential in many other fields.
Professor Dastoor said the current stage of development involved correlating real devices with actual saliva measurements.
"Where we are now then is having the ability to create a really low-cost sensor that we can print enormous quantities of, which would be sensitive to glucose in your saliva," he said. "So rather than diabetics having to stab themselves four to six times a day, you would just be able to lick." A non-invasive test for diabetics has been the Holy Grail in diabetes research for decades with tattoos, sensors and breathalysers among the current methods being developed.
Professor Dastoor said the most recent work had shown conclusively that the glucose levels in saliva were highly correlated with blood glucose.
"So, yes, I think it is a viable approach." There are expected to be 500 million people with diabetes by 2030. Professor Dastoor, who has been working on the project since 2007, said it was possible to integrate other low-cost electronic components.
"One of those might be, for example, a wireless sender built into the device itself. Then you have got the prospect of a reader that could readily communicate with your mobile phone," he said. "You could lick the test and just ask your phone 'what was my blood glucose reading?' "Professor Dastoor, who expects to get to commercial prototypes in about two years, plans to spin-out the technology from the university and gain further investment.
